Here's a few more thoughts to follow up on what we were talking about on Monday:

You need to state beta-equality as an axiom, since it needs to use substitution.
So, this implies there _must_ be a way of building equality proofs from axioms such as beta-equality.
So, it's not useful to use Leibniz equality as the equality here, since the only reason to have it is if you don't need to postulate the ways of proving equality.
(You _could_ stil use Leibniz equality, and accept that now there are axiomatic and non-axiomatic ways of proving the same equalities, but that seems suspect.)

Accepting that, we need to postulate equality and its proof rules.

There is another choice to make here: do we (option #1) make equality a type family, and so require term witnesses for equality (and all the equality proofs rules become axiomatized terms), _or_, do we (option #1) make equality only a judgment (at the same level as the typing judgment) and so all equality proofs are derivations (that don't have a term index)?

The problem with option #1 is the witnesses of equality have to be dealt with as terms, when we really don't care about them as terms, and we want proof-irrelevance anyway.
We're required to have a bunch of axiomatic terms that must have type arguments in order to make typing still make sense, which are used to build equality proofs.

The problem with option #2 is that, while we _don't_ have to deal with pesky term witnesses, now we can't actually write down proofs of equality to use elsewhere.
Equality proofs only exist as derivations, and so can't be passed around in terms.
This at first seemed to make option #2 a non-starter for me, but then I realized something about metaprogramming.

So, in this system, metaprogramming actually isn't performed over _terms_, it is performed over _derivations_.
Which actually has some other neat consequences, since derivations are already indexed by all the stuff you want access to while metaprogramming (context, type, term), and so you don't need a seperate special construct for accessing the context and goal and such, as you do in many other metaprogramming systems such as Coq's LTac and Agda's TC.
Anyway, because we're operating over _derivations_, the metaprogramming layer does have access to manipulating equality derivations.
Essentially, derivations are the witnesses of equality (so we don't have the redundancy of option #1 where there are _also_ base-layer terms that witness equality), and they are reasoned about by the metaprogramming layer that tries to produce them to be inserted into the derivations that are your actual base-layer program.
Which is exactly the kind of interface that we wanted in the first place!
So, option #2, and using metaprogramming as the interface to generating equality proofs without redundancy, seems like a somewhat promising direction.

