# Experimental Theories

## Noble Theories

These are [intensional theories](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/intensional+type+theory), where there is only one kind of equality, which combines what is usually separated into judgmental and definitional equalities.

It would be nice for the definition of equality to immediately yield
  - its an equivalent
  - it can be transported

## ex3

This experiment has equality _only_ be able to be reasoned about as a derivation, since there are no term witnesses to equality.

In essence, the derivation is the witness of the equality.

## ex4

This experiemnt basically just accepts that we need a bunch of axioms to support
equality and transport.

This does seem to work, but it has a few weird parts.

One weird part is that there needs to be these equality witnesses everywhere.
This is required since equality is a type, and so there are inhabitants of it. 
And we can't just posit a single term to handle all equalitys, since what the hell would be the type of that term? Doesn't work.

It seems possible that we could just have a derivation (Drv) for equalitys, as in [#ex3](#ex3).
And then those derivations could be generated by a metaprogram, which is actually producing a quoted derivation and then unquoting it there.

This seems necessary, since otherwise how could the user actually produce equalitys modularly? They can't if they aren't terms.

So this solution lets equality witnesses as derivations that don't have an index term (there is no term that can be extracted from it), which is what we want, since 

**problem! breaks properties of equality**

For example, if we can quote and unquote derivations, then we can quote two derivations that are equal, then show that they are not equal since they have different syntax.

So a major question here is: how do we state equality in the type theory?
If equality is a seperate judgement at the same level as the typing judgment, then we can't leverage everything we already have for types.
And also, what about other propositions? Do we really want to do away with proof relevance?

**idea: what if you only had transport rules, and no equality rules?**

Then you could use leibniz equality in your actual proofs in the base language. Hmm, how would this work?

## ex5

The basic starting point for a language with extensional type theory.
Nothing for datatypes or metaprogramming.

## ex6

Extending [ex5](#ex5) with simple data types as sums, products, and fixpoints.

PROBLEM: too many typing derivations required everywhere, which might make it actually impossible to write some things (see `ex0` and `ex1`)

## ex7

Modifying [ex6](#ex6) to require less child derivations in the derivation rules.
Let's see if that helps with its issues.